[blog] Introducing the Row Grouping feature (#30598)
mui-org/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0.md

---
title: 'Introducing Row Grouping Feature'
description: After more than a year of development on the DataGrid, the first premium feature is live.
date: 2022-01-15T00:00:00.000Z
authors:
  ['oliviertassinari', 'm4theushw', 'flaviendelangle', 'DanailH', 'alexfauquette']
card: true
---

<!-- <img src="/static/blog/2021/card.png" alt="" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" /> -->

# A step to premium plan: Row Grouping

> A lot of you were asking about it, and we are pleased to announce that the premium plan is on the road.

Reviewer: Same accross the whole article :+1: 

```suggestion
A lot of you were asking about it, and we are pleased to announce that the Premium plan is on the road.
```

> After an incredible year fully focused on improving the DataGrid, we are moving forward by releasing a first feature of the premium plan: the row grouping which is released in v5.3.0.

Reviewer: To avoid repetition

```suggestion
After an incredible year fully focused on improving the DataGrid, we are moving forward by releasing a first feature of the premium plan: the row grouping which is available in v5.3.0.
```

Or 

```suggestion
After an incredible year fully focused on improving the DataGrid, we are moving forward by launching the first feature of the premium plan: the row grouping which is released in v5.3.0.
```

> Let me introduce this new feature.

Reviewer: I would add a line break before this line.

## Start navigating the data 🚢

> If you already use the pro plan, you probably know the tree data that allows your users to navigate in the hierarchy by opening/closing children of a row.

Reviewer: Most of the pro users probably don't know it yet.
We may keep this wording to emphasize the importance of these kind of features
Or rephrase to something like

```suggestion
If you already use the pro plan, you may be familiar with the tree data which allows your users to navigate in the hierarchy by opening/closing children of a row.
```

However, everything does not have a natural hierarchy, and users might like to modify it.
Good news!
It is now possible with row grouping.

Let's play with the top 250 movies according to IMDb.
There is not a clear hierarchy to organize movies.
Should you group them by director, box office results or year of release?
The answer depends on what the user wants to do.
So let them be free to choose their own organization.
With the row grouping, they can go in the option menu of the “director” column and click on “Group by director” to group all the rows with the same director.

> If they are not interested anymore by the director, they can simply click on “Stop groping by director”.

Author: ```suggestion
If they are not interested anymore by the director, they can simply click on “Stop grouping by director”.
```

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0/blog1.gif" alt="grouping and un-grouping by director" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

## Unlock the feature 🔓🎁

> Since the Premium plan is not available yet, you can access it under experimental status in the DataGridPro.

Reviewer: My text is not perfect.
But I think there are things to reformulate.

```suggestion
This feature will be part of the Premium plan when we will launch it. For now, you can access it on the Pro plan by enabling an experimental feature.
The row grouping is stable in its current form. The experimental flag is here to make sure that the Pro plan will not have any regression when the feature will be moved to the Premium plan.
```

Don’t worry about the `experimentalFeatures` name.
The feature is stable in its current form.
The experimental flag is here to prevent regression in the pro plan.

```js
<DataGridPro experimentalFeatures={{ rowGrouping: true }} {...otherProps} />
```

Congratulation! Your users are now able to use the row grouping 🎉.

## Cherry pick the groupable columns 🍒

> Before letting your users enjoy this new feature, let adapt it to you use case.

Reviewer: Not sure

```suggestion
Before letting your users enjoy this new feature, let's adapt it to you use case.
```

> All the columns are not interesting to perform grouping.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the columns are not good candidates for grouping.
```

> In our example of movies, grouping by title does not make sense since each movie has a different name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our movie dataset example, grouping by title does not make sense since each movie has a different name.
```

or 

```suggestion
In our movies example, grouping by title does not make sense since each movie has a different name.
```

> You can remove the option for this specific column by setting the property `groupable` to `false` in the column definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can remove the ability to group this specific column by setting the property `groupable` to `false` in the column definition.
```

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0/groupable1.png" alt="remove groupable option" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

## Customize the grouping behavior 🔧

Some columns are interesting, but not that easy to group by.
For example, the release date of a movie is interesting, but grouping by the exact date leads to one group per movie (except for “The Thing” and “Blade Runner” both released on June 25, 1982).
It is more interesting to group them by decade.
For this purpose, column definition accept the property `keyGetter`.
Its signature is similar to `valueGetter` and it returns the grouping key associated to the column. To group movies by decade, you can use for example

```js
keyGetter: ({ value }) => `${Math.floor(value.getFullYear() / 10)}0's`;
```

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0/blog2.gif" alt="grouping by release decade" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

> More details about customization can be found in the [documentation](/components/data-grid/group-pivot/#disable-the-row-grouping)

Reviewer: Maybe add a delimiter `____ ` above this line to clearly show that it is the conclusion of the article and not the conclusion of the paragraph

Author: I did not fond a way to put a delimiter so I simply add a title "Thank you"

> Thanks for reading. We hope you will enjoy this new feature. Do not hesitate to open issues to share feedbacks, report bugs, or propose enhancement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks for reading. We hope you will enjoy this new feature. Do not hesitate to open [issues](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/issues/new/choose) to share feedbacks, report bugs, or propose enhancement.
```

---

> title: 'Introducing Row Grouping Feature'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: 'Introducing the Row Grouping feature'
```

description: After more than a year of development on the DataGrid, the first premium feature is live.
date: 2022-01-20T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['alexfauquette']
---

> # A step to Premium plan: Row Grouping
> 

Reviewer 2: two h1 are usually discouraged for SEO

```suggestion
```

A lot of you were asking about it, and we are pleased to announce that the Premium plan is on the road.

> After an incredible year fully focused on improving the DataGrid, we are moving forward by launching the first feature of the Premium plan: the [row grouping](/components/data-grid/group-pivot/#row-grouping) which is released in [v5.3.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/releases).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After an incredible year fully focused on improving the DataGrid, we are moving forward by launching the first feature of the Premium plan: the [row grouping](/components/data-grid/group-pivot/#row-grouping) which is released in [v5.3.0](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/releases/tag/v5.3.0).
```

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0/groupable1.png" alt="remove groupable option" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

## Customize the grouping behavior 🔧

Some columns are interesting, but not that easy to group by.
For example, the release date of a movie is interesting, but grouping by the exact date leads to one group per movie (except for “The Thing” and “Blade Runner” both released on June 25, 1982).
It is more interesting to group them by decade.
For this purpose, the column definitions accept the property [`groupingValueGetter`](/components/data-grid/group-pivot/#using-groupingvaluegetter-for-complex-grouping-value).
Its signature is similar to `valueGetter` and it returns the grouping value associated to the column. To group movies by decade, you can use for example

```js
groupingValueGetter: ({ value }) => `${Math.floor(value.getFullYear() / 10)}0's`;
```

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0/blog2.gif" alt="grouping by release decade" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

## Thank you

More details about customization can be found in the [documentation](/components/data-grid/group-pivot/#disable-the-row-grouping)

> Thanks for reading. To get more information about the v5.3.0, visit the [changelog](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/releases). We hope you will enjoy this new feature. Do not hesitate to open [issues](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/issues/new/choose) to share feedback, report bugs, or propose enhancements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thanks for reading. To get more information about the v5.3.0 release, visit the [changelog](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/releases/tag/v5.3.0).
We hope you will enjoy this new feature. Do not hesitate to open [issues](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/issues/new/choose) to share feedback, report bugs, or propose enhancements.
```

---
title: 'Introducing Row Grouping Feature'
description: After more than a year of development on the DataGrid, the first premium feature is live.

> date: 2022-01-15T00:00:00.000Z

Reviewer 2: ?

```suggestion
date: 2022-01-20T00:00:00.000Z
```

> authors:
>   ['oliviertassinari', 'm4theushw', 'flaviendelangle', 'DanailH', 'alexfauquette']

Reviewer 2: ?

```suggestion
authors: ['alexfauquette']
```

> card: true

Reviewer 2: We set card to true, but we have no card.png file

---

<!-- <img src="/static/blog/2021/card.png" alt="" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" /> -->

# A step to Premium plan: Row Grouping

A lot of you were asking about it, and we are pleased to announce that the Premium plan is on the road.
After an incredible year fully focused on improving the DataGrid, we are moving forward by launching the first feature of the Premium plan: the row grouping which is released in v5.3.0.

Let me introduce this new feature.

## Start navigating the data 🚢

If you already use the pro plan, you may be familiar with the [tree data](/components/data-grid/group-pivot/#tree-data) which allows your users to navigate in the hierarchy by opening/closing children of a row.
However, everything does not have a natural hierarchy, and users might like to modify it.
Good news!
It is now possible with row grouping.

Let's play with the top 250 movies according to IMDb.
There is not a clear hierarchy to organize movies.

> Should you group them by director, box office results or year of release?

Reviewer 2: Oxford comma seems to make sense here.

```suggestion
Should you group them by director, box office results, or year of release?
```

The answer depends on what the user wants to do.
So let them be free to choose their own organization.

> With the row grouping, they can go in the option menu of the “director” column and click on “Group by director” to group all the rows with the same director.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the row grouping, they can go to the column menu of the “director” column and click on “Group by director” to group all the rows with the same director.
```

> If they are not interested anymore by the director, they can simply click on “Stop grouping by director”.

Reviewer 2: I believe https://www.quora.com/Is-it-grammatical-to-say-someone-is-interested-by-or-in-something

```suggestion
If they are not interested anymore in the director, they can simply click on “Stop grouping by director”.
```

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0/blog1.gif" alt="grouping and un-grouping by director" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

## Unlock the feature 🔓🎁

This feature will be part of the Premium plan when we will launch it. For now, you can access it on the Pro plan by enabling an experimental feature.
The row grouping is stable in its current form.
The experimental flag is here to make sure that the Pro plan will not have any regression when the feature will be moved to the Premium plan.

```js
<DataGridPro experimentalFeatures={{ rowGrouping: true }} {...otherProps} />
```

Congratulation! Your users are now able to use the row grouping 🎉.

## Provide nice default grouping

Save your user time by defining initial grouping. To do so, specify the row grouping model in the `initialState` prop. For a page about director's results, we could group by director, and box office as follow.

```js
<DataGridPro
  experimentalFeatures={{ rowGrouping: true }}
  initialState={{
    rowGrouping: {
      model: ['Director', 'BoxOffice'],
    },
  }}
  {...otherProps}
/>
```

> Users are still free to modify this grouping configuration by going into the option menues. But in few click you can se that Hitchcock's box office results vary a lot.

Reviewer 2: the official name, it seems: https://mui.com/components/data-grid/columns/#column-menu

```suggestion
Users are still free to modify this grouping configuration by going into the column menu.
But in few click you can se that Hitchcock's box office results vary a lot.
```

> Users are still free to modify this grouping configuration by going into the option menues. But in few click you can se that Hitchcock's box office results vary a lot.

Author: ```suggestion
Users are still free to modify this grouping configuration by going into the column menu.
But in a few clicks, you can see that Hitchcock's box office results vary a lot.
```

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0/defaultSettings.png" alt="remove groupable option" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

## Cherry pick the groupable columns 🍒

Before letting your users enjoy this new feature, let adapt it to you use case.
All the columns are not good candidates for grouping.
In our movies example, grouping by title does not make sense since each movie has a different name.
You can remove the ability to group this specific column by setting the property `groupable` to `false` in the column definition.

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0/groupable1.png" alt="remove groupable option" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

## Customize the grouping behavior 🔧

Some columns are interesting, but not that easy to group by.
For example, the release date of a movie is interesting, but grouping by the exact date leads to one group per movie (except for “The Thing” and “Blade Runner” both released on June 25, 1982).
It is more interesting to group them by decade.

> For this purpose, column definition accept the property `keyGetter`.

Reviewer 2: I assume it's the plural: https://mui.com/components/data-grid/columns/#column-definitions

```suggestion
For this purpose, the column definitions accept the property `keyGetter`.
```

Its signature is similar to `valueGetter` and it returns the grouping key associated to the column. To group movies by decade, you can use for example

```js
keyGetter: ({ value }) => `${Math.floor(value.getFullYear() / 10)}0's`;
```

<img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v5.3.0/blog2.gif" alt="grouping by release decade" style="width: 100%; margin-bottom: 16px;" />

## Thank you

More details about customization can be found in the [documentation](/components/data-grid/group-pivot/#disable-the-row-grouping)

> Thanks for reading. We hope you will enjoy this new feature. Do not hesitate to open [issues](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/issues/new/choose) to share feedbacks, report bugs, or propose enhancement.

Reviewer 2: feedback is uncountable

```suggestion
Thanks for reading. We hope you will enjoy this new feature. Do not hesitate to open [issues](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui-x/issues/new/choose) to share feedback, report bugs, or propose enhancements.
```
